yeah thank you very much indeed to give
me the chance and the opportunity just
to start with some short remarks don't
worry that we have this session since I
mean in every country since infectious
disease our which is good on decline
because of better treatment and and
vaccination we have a non communicable
diseases are the ones actually that get
more and more into the focus of the
w-h-o as well as with within the
international community and of course
for the national health policy politics
in an aging society as Germany is we
know already that in 2030 we will have
600,000 that is yes what we assume
600,000 new diagnosis of cancer per year
and that counts for all societies since
all our societies are aging societies
meanwhile on different levels but never
nevertheless by the way I just learned
that China soon will be the country and
remain the country with most new cancer
diagnoses per year on the world and that
might change research because of the
genetic background of the disease the
focus if the focus changes we might get
to know a different view even in Europe
and the Western world on on research and
what what this development means for us
and our treatment and situation we have
a good situation in Germany with the
German Cancer Research Center and
Heidelberg perhaps some of you know it
it's it's engaged very much worldwide in
the research we have a good Network we
try to improve it from a bench to
bedside and back but still we have the
feeling we can get better and like the
u.s. started kind of moonshot initiative
around cancer we are just about to
pronounce next week the National decade
against cancer the federal ministry of
research my colleague and either
as a minister for health we will
pronounce it next week and the idea is
actually to bring more together the
research community and the clinicians
that what I said to bedside and bad back
that that better works and we want to
focus on biotech of course digitization
artificial intelligence in this area of
cancer and we want that the perspective
of patients and families is more and
their families is more in the focus of
what we do psycho-oncology treatment for
example is something so far bit under
valued when it comes to to treatment and
that is actually yeah what we are about
to start next week of course we need I
just had some some talks yesterday and
today whose pharmaceutical companies we
take need to take into account what's
going on research wise I'm very glad and
very interesting what we're here on the
panel right now Carty for example is for
every National Health System a kind of
challenge because it's quite expensive I
mean it really brings seems to bring let
me put it that way
new big chances for patients that had no
chance for treatment right now after
everything was tried and that it's a new
chance last just last week I visited the
children oncology capacity in Berlin
with a charity our big University
Hospital and they tried it was what they
needed to try because they had no other
chance for a one-year-old sure a child
with leukemia for the first time was the
blood of the mother and not of the child
and it was healed seems to began
the disease and that is really progress
but it's coming with the costs too and
so it's it's a challenge for us in the
national health system actually how do
we deal with all these new treatments
that are on the way so actually that is
what we plan on the national level what
I love to to close up with that one to
have is that we have a real European
initiative on this one some are flying
to the moon right now and show the world
what is Europe at least and perhaps we
can combine it with other countries and
regions then we had in Europe we should
focus more on some concrete goals that
explain to people why it is make sense
to work together I mean a multilateral
world only works if people back home
realize its added value for all of us
and fighting cancer and making really
progress in it and saying we want to to
combat cancer in the next ten years
could be such a goal for for Europe and
to combine forces and to make really a
difference in the upcoming 10 years so
from the National decade against cancer
I'd love to actually widen up to a
European decade against cancer in the
upcoming after the upcoming European
election and then perhaps even a
combined process with other regions of
the world so this for this it is
important to talk to each other
worldwide and this is a perfect panel
for that and so I'm very keen on here to
hear what's actually going on thank you
very much thank you thank you Minister
spawning that was a great segue to where
we're headed
so on this the last day of the 2019
World Economic Forum annual meeting
we've saved the best for last
we have an extraordinary panel but
before we introduced them I just want to
lay some - two facts out for you so late
last year the Nobel Prize Committee
awarded its Prize for Physiology or
medicine to tasuku hon Joe and Jim
Allison for their seminal discoveries
that have led to what is now a modern
revolution in the immunotherapy against
cancer it if you look in just the last
year there have been more than a half a
dozen approvals of drugs of agents that
unleash the power of the immune system
on cancer in Europe and in the United
States and there are many people now in
the research community who are genuinely
excited about next-level breakthroughs
in this fight against cancer so that's
the good news
the not-so-good news is it about the
same time as these announcements were
being made about the Nobel Prize the
World Health Organization's you know
hierarch it's agency that studies cancer
was releasing to much less fanfare
something that was kind of frightening
which was it's it's published estimates
for the cancer burden in the world and
so the numbers were 18 point 1 million
new cases of cancer across the world in
2018 and nine point six million deaths
so I just want to repeat that for a
minute 18 point 1 million new cases of
cancer in 2018 last year and nine point
six million deaths
that's an enormous burden and this is
something that is as the minister said
is increasingly affecting the developing
world you know which has really as it's
been fighting infectious disease and I
saw I saw Seth Berkley walk in here and
who's doing extraordinary job by the way
through the GAVI Alliance of handling
these kinds of emerging threats to
health but we do have this long term
burden of cancer that is coming down the
pike and so as so the good and the bad
the as the extraordinary progress we've
been making which is is is a reason for
genuine I think
and also the global burden that's rising
which is reason for genuine sober
reflection and to discuss this this epic
challenge and how we meet that we have
an extraordinary group as I said my far
left is Hiroshima Kootenai who is the
chairman and CEO of Rakuten in Japan
then in the middle we have Julie Louise
ribbiting who's executive vice president
and chief patient officer and strategic
communications global public policy and
population health for MSD which is a
division of Merck and is the former head
of the CDC in the US and to my immediate
left is Siddhartha Mukherjee who is the
assistant professor of medicine at
Columbia University in the US and of
course the author of the Emperor of all
maladies which is no doubt the most
extraordinary book that's ever been
written about cancer and so you know I'd
love to start with you SID since you've
got such a great perspective on the
history and timeline of cancer I mean
the Emperor of all maladies I have to
say if you haven't read it it's
extraordinary its vivid its lyrical but
it really is its own genre of book you
you created what I'm now coining a
Pythagoras II a biography of a pathology
and you have this fantastic span of
history of the of the disease and the
people who've struggled to overcome it
where are we now in the time line in the
fight against cancer so thank you for
for that introduction
you know I like to think about the
timeline of cancer in in a kind of
typography and that typography is very
important as we think about the global
burden of cancer and it can be likened
to a pyramid the bottom of the pyramid
we know very clearly is cancer
prevention we are not going to solve the
problem of cancer without concentrating
on the bottom of the pyramid which is to
prevent cancer from occurring in the
first place and I will talk a lot more
about it because we know much more about
it about that bottom of the pyramid than
we knew before the the middle of the
pyramid would
be a broad category but we we might call
it secondary prevention or early
detection finding cancer in its early
phases and removing it so that it does
not spread in metastasize in the body
because of course for most cancers it's
metastatic cancer that kills you not the
primary tumor generally the top of the
pyramid is cancer treatment so again
prevention early detection treatment
vast amounts of resources and a vast
amount of national attention and
international attention it's paid at the
top of the pyramid and there's a good
reason for that it effort for treatment
and of course immunotherapy is one
example of that is is is is is is the
capacity to treat cancer using the
immune system but it's important to
remember that it's the bottom of the
pyramid that that deserves attention in
the next decade or so and it's important
to remember that all these three parts
communicate with each other these are
not isolated silos so let me talk a
little bit about prevention and we can
come and talk more globally but about
treatment in a second what do we know
now about cancer prevention as the
landscape has evolved well number one
the one surprising thing and one
disturbing thing about what we know
about the bottom of the pyramid is that
for the last decade or so and this is
going to be a provocative controversial
statement so push back push back on
everyone yeah for the last decade or so
I would argue we have not found
removable human chemical carcinogens of
substantial impact our capacity to find
substantial numerical impact has gone
down dramatically that does not mean
that they don't exist of course tobacco
smoke is rampant is a huge carcinogen
but we known that since the 1980s 1950s
1960s you might say big carcinogens that
really we haven't been able to find when
people ask me what do I do in my own
life as an oncologist to avoid cancer
I'm not doing anything different in 2017
that I wasn't doing in 1997
fundamentally speaking so there are
three possible reasons for this reason
one is that we haven't we aren't finding
them because we don't have the right
tools reason 2 is
that they do exist but their death by a
thousand cuts so there are many of them
they have impact there is somehow
additive they're adding it themselves up
in in the body and reason three is that
maybe they don't exist in the way that
we that we think they exist in fact some
or a fraction of cancer is the result of
changes in DNA that are acquired when
cells divide and make mistakes now that
is not to say that there aren't
carcinogens that we should not be
tackling it's a double negative in other
words that is to say that there are
carcinogens that we should be tattling
human papillomavirus tobacco smoke and
other viruses that are rampant across
the world which you can vaccinate
against other forms of question agents
but the point is that we only need to
learn much much more about the bottom of
the pyramid and that we are learning a
lot more about the bottom of the pyramid
so I'd like to concentrate as we move
along in the panel and what we know now
but the bottom of that pyramid so I
definitely want to do that but Julia I
fir if you'll forgive me said I want to
go to the top of the pyramid for just a
second and that's because so you work
for MSD which is part of Merc Merc has
been a pioneering leader in the case of
immunotherapy for cancer but you've also
been in the previous life the head of
the Center for disease prevention and
for credential CDC control and
prevention and and a huge part of that
is the bottom of the pyramid
so you're you've had some experience on
both my question is do you think that
the progress we're making at the top of
the period pyramid is substantial enough
to to make a difference given given what
you know about the the ongoing challenge
of the burden first of all thank you for
including me on the panel and thanks to
everyone who's here to listen and learn
you know you really said yourself at the
beginning if we're if we have 18 million
new cases of cancer a year you're not
succeeding at the bottom of that pyramid
so clearly we have a lot of work to do
in that area and you know there are
drivers for those numbers and one of the
biggest drivers of course is the aging
of our population because as you said
the
cumulation of our duration on earth also
accumulates changes in our DNA that
probably predispose us to cancer but
we're also living in an environment
where they're enormous disparities in
the incidence of cancer not just
Geographic disparities but
socio-economic disparities and exposure
experience disparities in some cases but
I think the third thing that we're
learning is that we really can bend the
curve so we have pockets where we are
seeing relative success in cancer
prevention and control now I'll just
mention a couple tobacco in countries
that really have implemented
comprehensive tobacco control programs
the curve is bending on lung cancer you
know and that is a tremendous public
health success granted it took decades
to get there and we still have a long
way to go but you know we can change the
shape of that pyramid I think the other
that you mentioned in terms of HPV is a
carcinogen we're seeing now that a
combination of vaccinations and
screening for HPV disease and and
hopefully early and better treatments
really can essentially eliminate
cervical cancer at least it's
technically possible to to have that
conversation again massive disparities
and we have a long way to go to get
there and the last thing I would say is
just in terms of the of the the science
of the situation probably the the
biggest curve bender ahead of us really
relates to the breakthroughs in in the
science that we now have at our disposal
the tools in our toolbox
you mentioned the cart T therapy or the
the gene therapy for a child with
leukemia minister but there are so many
new modalities now that we really this
is the time to have the decade against
cancer because we do have the tools in
our toolbox so Julie let me follow up on
some of these bending curves so in the
case of cervical cancer we have made
tremendous strides in the developed
world but in sub-saharan Africa it's
still a major killer of women and what
was frightening is the latest report
from from the World Health Organization
showed that monkey
answer rates globally were rising in
women in large part because of a lack of
tobacco control programs in much of the
world you know this is a challenge of
when we talk about cancer we're talking
about hundreds of diseases and we're
also talking about huge disparities in
terms of the kinds of people who get it
and where they're where they are and how
they're being treated even in the
developed world we see dramatically
different rates in survival between
black Americans for example in white
Americans and so how do we begin to
address these disparities with the
structure that we have well one way of
thinking about it is to remember that
the pyramid that we're talking about
does demonstrate that the biggest value
comes from addressing the base and
prevention on a per capita basis is much
cheaper than any treatment that we have
at the tip of the pyramid so we do need
to think differently about how we
prioritize our investments and the
prevention investments are always if not
cost savings cost effect so if you if
you prevent cancer you're reducing both
ends of the cancer burden the new cases
and the deaths as opposed to just the
mortality micki this is you know we
talked sometimes in these big statistics
you have a statistic of one which is why
you got into this talk talk a little bit
about the experience with your father
being diagnosed with pancreatic cancer
yeah yeah so to self my self a little
bit I'm an internet entrepreneur I
started my own company rocked in twenty
two years ago and you know when you know
nobody we believe anybody will buy
something on the internet so I'm kind of
disruptive crazy entrepreneur but I
survived for last 22 years if you look
at background for the Amazon and
ourselves are the only two companies
survived this long and then we family my
father had a pancreatic cancer six years
ago
at that time I didn't have much
knowledge about the cancer to be very
honest but I loved my mother father and
I'm kind of crazy enough to start my
journey exhalation Oh to find the most
advanced cure against pancreatic cancer
so at literally I travel all around the
world I mean to Stanford UCSF UC San
Diego I went to Columbia Harvard Paris
University in University in Japan and
conclusion was other than very very
toxic combination therapy there was no
in a good cure and but interesting
enough my friend with the client of my
business Kobe and he was also a friend
of my father Tom hey McKee
my cousin is doing this very interesting
research at MCI his Japanese and he's
what is it
and he said he's using light to cure
cancer using light lights cancer yeah I
said give me a break right how can you
kill the cancer with light but I was
desperate so and he said by the way
President Obama mentioned about this
project in his opening speech oh I
better go and check it out
so I marry meaning wisdom and it was you
know kind of we my chin dropped and I
opening a you know opportunity for me
what it is basically we create a country
of antibody with some special chemical
and which certainly react only to
certain type of lights yeah anyway they
were just trying on the animals at the
time I saw it and when I spoke with my
doctor friends about this 99 percent of
them said hey Mickey those kind of
things work on animal but it never works
on human he but I was a mature enough no
no no this is gonna work it doesn't
because we're not talking about
chemical reaction or biological action
we're talking about cause triggering the
chemical reaction using lights beam
targeting and specifically destroying
the cancer I didn't know about the side
effect or you know what would be ongoing
immune response at the time but I
thought this should work and that's I
think strengths of damage errs right
everybody in this industry of a long
long time you know a kind of trap or it
may open your paranoid right but I have
a fresh eye and we're enough you know we
completely face to trial and the result
has been very very amazing so that's
exciting
I'm city you know as somebody who again
coming back to your role as historian n
doctor you know we've had these moments
of optimism where now we're talking
about immunotherapy but back in the
1900s we were talking about radiation
therapy as the great cure and then
combination chemotherapy which in the
early cases of the cures of leukemia and
Hodgkin's disease which I'm actually
standing here as a beneficiary of that
early cancer chemotherapy in the 1970s
and then we had anti-angiogenesis drugs
this would these were drugs that were
going to choke off the blood supply and
then we have the targeted molecularly
targeted medicines like Gleevec which
were the smart drugs in cancer and in
fact even before this we had
immunotherapies super drugs like
interleukin 2 and interferon which we
put on the cover of fortune in 1985 you
know we've been through this before how
real is we're what's different about the
immunotherapy revolution that we're in
now well first of all you have to think
of the our armamentarium against cancer
not as individual therapies but as the
possibility of combat these are things
that are additive so in other words
cytotoxic chemotherapy the kind of
therapy that we use is great at reducing
tumor burden
it killed cells and brings down your
cell burden from billions of cells down
to hundreds of thousands of cells but of
course it often doesn't cure it cure
some cancers but doesn't cure many
cancers and those 10,000 cells that are
left hundred thousand 1 million cells
then grow up again and you know it's
like beheading the monster and comes
right back
targeted therapies allowed us to use
Achilles heels like concepts to now go
after even those thousand ten thousand 1
million cells that were left and and and
attack them with it with their
particular vulnerabilities immunotherapy
is is yet another iteration in this but
what here's what's different and it's
very important is that most of the
cancer therapies that we were developing
thus far were seed therapies and this is
an old concept that goes back to the
1800s and it is to imagine cancer as the
seed and the body as the soil of the
host as the soil the the seed of course
with this this concept comes from the
great surgeon Padgett us a very simple
question I mean if you read bad if I
make my students actually go back and
read Paget's in 1898 in which Padgett
just asked a simple question he says the
spleen is about the same size as the
liver it has a similar kind of blood
supply and yet the liver is a vastly
disproportional site of metastases the
spleen barely ever gets the metastases
he gives a second example he says breast
cancer metastasizes to the bone but
who's ever heard of a finger metastasis
of breast cancer you've never heard it
metastasized to the axial skeleton but
not to the distal schedule but it's the
same bone so why is they mean a therapy
different I mean if therapy is different
because it uses the soil to attack the
seed and why is that important that is
important because now we're beginning to
understand that cancer is an interaction
between seed and soil and that we know
have to have to understand much
much more about the solemn only to
studies that were published recently
that are very important one is a study
in which they biopsied the esophagi
esophageal cells from patients with
elderly patients with and without
smoking smokers are non-smokers
what's important is is is the following
point which is that even within the
non-smokers but especially within the
smokers you can see cancerous changes in
cells but no Frank cancer in fact they
if you look at the esophagus of such a
person there are what would be
technically called cancer cells but
they're not cancerous they're not
invasive something about their body
something about the physiological state
of the body whether it's the immune
system whether it is their metabolic
Malou something is controlling or
putting a back pressure on the
development of cancer so what I think is
important for about immunotherapy is
actually two things one of which has
been widely appreciated the widely
appreciated thing is that it's a great
treatment for cancer it allows us to
understand how to use the immune system
against cancers that were previously
very refractory to treatment but the
second thing that has been less
appreciated is that it begins to open up
the box of the soil and when you open up
the box of the soil you actually find a
kind of wormhole as it were from the
treatment down to prevention you can ask
questions like why is it that some
people are not getting cancer is it
because there's something special about
their immune system is it something
about their soil that we haven't
previously identified so it breaks it
finally I hope we are hoping all of us
that will allow us to break through this
kind of impasse that we were in cancer
prevention by identifying States or
identifying people who are at higher
risk and thereby beginning to sort of
coordinate this pyramid from the bottom
up to the top it's a soil therapy and
I'm very excited about soil therapies
because they are changing the way we
think about the paradigms of cancer I
think that's that's very helpful the
seed and soil hypothesis of cancer Julie
you said something really important
before which is you said as we a
we accumulate mutations in our DNA lots
of accidents happen some of them are
assaults from the outside in the
chemical world or the physical world
some of them are internal in terms of
radicals free free radicals that that
happen and go into the body oxygen
metabolizing chemicals that interact
with DNA and as this happens you know
this accumulation of DNA mutations
sometimes it happens in just the wrong
way and all the fail-safes fail and you
start to get cancer or we human beings
at an inevitable you know is this just
an inevitability of being human of
getting cancer over time it's just
another you know breakdown of the body
as it were I think there's some
plausibility in your theory but clearly
there's so many exceptions to that rule
that I don't think we can say it's an
inevitability but you know and when you
were talking about the seed in the soil
I was thinking when I was very young and
starting out my career in biology I was
told by a important professor that if
you understood syphilis you would
understand medicine then I became an
intern and we had the HIV epidemic and I
was told well if we really understand
HIV and how its interacting with the
body and how its evolving and the
opportunistic infections and cancers
that follow it we will understand
medicine and now I'm really beginning to
think that if we understand cancer we
would really understand medicine and
particularly the psycho neurobiological
includes the biomes because there's so
much information exchange going on in
our bodies all the time it's not just a
static process of DNA eventually making
too many mistakes there there are
problems and then there are corrective
factors and humors and small molecules
that are speaking to our immune systems
all the time and we simply don't know
there are so many of these systems
there was the genome which was supposed
to give us the code to life and then
there's the proteome which is the
proteins that are encoded by these genes
and then there's the metabolome which is
all of the you know the metabolic things
and the bacterium all the bacteria that
are synergistic and so on you know and
as we've come they're just so much data
to us and I think another dimension of
this is you know the dogma has always
been that as you age your immune system
gradually deteriorates so that part of
the susceptibility here is the
accumulation and the other part is the
fact that our defense systems wear down
but one of the interesting things that
we see in some of the patients who are
responding to immunotherapy is they're
really old right and so it tells you
that when you turn their immune system
back on there's enough immune system
there to basically cure their cancer how
could that be I mean it defies our
traditional dog dogma about immune
senescence so so Mickey you know when I
was talking with you earlier before the
session you know it was clear that you
were talking about antibody conjugates
and this you know EGFR receptors and all
of these there's sort of the
conversation of modern cancer and
biology that you seem to have mastered
in a short time I'm guessing that as
you're self-described crazy technology
disrupter that six years ago before your
father's illness you didn't know any of
this stuff how how did you start to
teach yourself about the sort of the
cancer biology well of course when we
learned that my father had a penguin
cancer I you know visited and had a talk
where's the you know top scientists and
oncologists in everybody and during that
course I learned the basics of cancer
cells and immune systems and so forth
and then I of course we invested I was
so enjoying invested to this photograph
therapy project as a manager I found it
like 95% of it so far and
definitely I'm in a board meeting I
wrote notes about the world everybody's
thinking what is what are they talking
about right and go back and go ahead and
which works and I'm not saying I'm not
completely understand but I my our
approach is not super targeting any DNA
or you know RNA and I think the reason
why I could have understand approach is
coming from totally different angle
he compared with other services I want
to jump into that because you know there
are so many tech tech entrepreneurs now
who are getting into cancer and there is
this this they're bringing a mentality
of quote fail-fast
into the cancer research world and
development and they're really pushing
the envelope in some cases into new
science into places that traditional
science hasn't gone sometimes they're
just faster in terms of creating genomic
sequencing companies or others you know
the tools of the technology of the world
what is it about
matech world that what can detect will
bring to the cancer research world well
for so including my project although
this is for-profit business most of the
cause is coming from kind of France
tropical a mindset mm-hm
so I put in twenty million dollars I
think it's gonna be hugely successful
but even if you fail we don't care right
because this is like me bring the money
back to the society the second the good
thing about this kind of transfer of
approach is bringing in the mentality of
entrepreneurship to drug development and
of course it's totally different field
but you know entrepreneurs we care about
about a reality
and then of course in this cancer
academic society there are all sorts of
ongoing long talk talk talk approach
let's just test and see let's just
explore so I think mentality approach
are a little bit different and and of
course we cannot do it by ourselves but
we can be a great partner to the great
scientists so Julie you know the
Minister mr. spon said earlier about the
cost of some of these drugs
you work for a drug company a big one
just to put this in perspective in the
last five years in the United States the
drug costs cancer drug costs have
doubled in just five years
they're predicted to double again in
2017 the average drug that came out that
was released in the market was averaged
$100,000 as an average cost in fact
there was no drug in 2018 that was below
$100,000 when it was released if you're
thinking about is as Sid said it's it's
additive the treatments you're gonna be
combining a lot of these drugs you know
how can even develop Western countries
afford this let alone in the developing
world how do we got to get our hands
around this don't we we do and at the
same time having cancer it's very
expensive you know if you need treatment
and chemotherapy and radiation therapy
and surgery and all of the other
modalities that come into play the cost
of cancer care is expensive so what we
really need to find are the ways that we
can precisely identify patients who are
going to respond to a given set of tools
and recognize that the aim here is cure
so curing cancer is going to be a lot
less expensive than spending a lot of
money over an arc of time in treating it
and often repeatedly treating it and we
don't think of cancer medicines as
investments in cures
if you just look at the cost of the
medicine as it's a large number but if
you look at what's the cost diverted
when you're able to treat with highly
effective cancer medicines you can see
that that innovation is really worth it
and I just kind of go back again to the
HIV environment because when we were
beginning to launch HIV drugs
we had the same conversation those drugs
were expensive when they first came out
of course over time and as the period of
exclusivity ends the drugs are now
widely available in every part of the
world at a price that is affordable but
the incredible cost of care of HIV
disease in 1980 really justifies the
investment that were made in counts for
the rise though because it in 2013 I
mean this has been happening for a while
you can go back and see this really kind
of extraordinary rise in 2013 the WHO
estimates that global spending on cancer
drugs just on drugs was ninety six
billion dollars in 2013 in 2017 just
four years later it was a hundred and
thirty three billion and it's projected
to go again by that same slope upward
you know what why is it so I mean I
understand why it's expensive but why is
it getting so much more expensive so
fast but a couple of reasons for I think
the rapid increase one is that the
trucks are working so we're using them
and a lot more patients particularly the
current and hopefully future generations
of the immune oncology drugs
I mean MSD has has one of the immuno
oncology drugs and we are having 900
clinical trials with this drug in 30
different tumor types and we already
have survival advantage in several so
you know we're seeing the in investment
increase because the drugs are working
and they're working much more broadly
than we imagined yeah I mean I think
that's true and I think it's important
to say that the the numbers are a little
scary in terms of the fact that even now
only about a third of people respond to
the easy immunotherapies in the specific
cancers and melanoma which is the most
the kids are probably most receptive to
immunotherapy
the initial response rates are about 60%
but over a three-year period it's it
drops to about 40 or 30% and so this
brings us back to the conversation you
and Sid we're talking about which is
that bottom of the pyramid by the time
we get to that state it's kind of it's
not always too late thankfully and it's
getting again possible to cure cancers
later on but we really have to address
this earlier said there's no doubt about
it and but I but but the important
feature of of this is that as I said in
the past the the either three levels of
the pyramid by the way the middle level
is as I said early detection it were
were dissociated from each other to a
large extent there were people who are
working on prevention who thought of of
the after of the total sum of cancer
money or the total sum of resources as a
zero-sum game every piece of money that
goes to treatment is taken away from
prevention that's that's less and less
true because we are being informed by
what is the biology is informing us in
every direction and as I said we now
know a lot more about immunotherapy we
hope to learn a lot more about obesity
but we see this is a great example in
fact I said I made the provocative idea
that we haven't discovered a carcinogen
since the 1990s we actually have
although it's not technically a
carcinogen in the standard sense it does
not damage DNA as we understand it but
what it does is it might create human
States physiological states that might
be inflammatory that might be otherwise
linked to obesity that somehow or the
other increase clearly increase the risk
of certain cancers but not other cancers
so you talking about sugar right sugar
is one of the not sure what we're
running actually we ourselves I've got a
big study on this
I was just published in Nature we're
running a big study on this starting
they're very very very soon changing the
diet to make it more receptive to
chemotherapy that's our study but so
what we try what we're finding out is
that from the that the the if the
ecosystem would work correctly
mm-hm and we would be we should be
able to find trapdoors or or real
insights between these three aspects of
the pyramid and that will move the clock
forward because clearly something is you
know we cannot afford to treat hundreds
of millions of patients with
extraordinarily expensive drugs
especially if the responses are not
doable so in a minute I just want to
open it up for questions so if you have
a question you know please raise your
hand and we'll get a microphone to you
hopefully I think we've got microphones
in just a second but I'm calling you in
just a second but I want to follow up on
this issue of whether we are doing
enough in in this in the science
systematically to have an effort in the
prevention effort in other words are we
finding biomarkers that can warn us of
the cancer State or cancer progression
you mentioned the fact that we really
haven't found any chemical carcinogens
of significance that we can identify as
yes this is causing cancer even though
they may be part of a slew of chemicals
that are damaging DNA you know how do we
change the cultures that we do shift a
little bit more towards that bottom that
impairment well I think one of the ways
is to be to have very strict criteria I
mean I think I like I like Mickey's
comments about entrepreneurship hmm but
on the other hand we also the criteria
for judging whether drug works or if
therapy works or the prevention
mechanism works are and have been very
clearly defined
we can't keep changing the goal posts
and the FDA has been very thoughtful for
a long time and CDC has been a
thoughtful a long time but about making
clear that if if you shift goal posts
things go horribly wrong right so we
there's a process by which by which the
by which any therapy or any experimental
modality is evaluated to a phase 1 phase
2 phase 3 trial drug study it is the the
endpoints are created so that we're
looking for survival and mortality
mortality is a very important endpoint
because there are endemic biases in
response rate sensor
viable rates and so forth we can talk
about them they extensively studied so
you need to have hard endpoints you need
to have you need to follow the you need
to follow the rules and so on one hand
the Entrepreneurship is very helpful
because it breaks and disrupts the
ecosystem but on the other hand there's
also push back a important push back
from organizations that know that bites
by changing goal posts and making
language slippery it actually doesn't
help so interesting yeah there has to be
a push-pull dynamic here and that's very
important fantastic we've got a question
Seth Berkeley CEO of Gavi thanks Clifton
and I love your Sitz all kind of way of
thinking about this I want to build on
what you just talked about and it's
interesting I mean I would argue
exercise as an example of something that
improves health in multiple ways
probably prevents cancer so there's an
example of something that can be
recommended but what we've also done in
the past is we've had these crazes I
remember we all remember Linus Pauling
with vitamin C and then it was selenium
and it was vitamin E and vitamin D and
and and one of the challenges I think
when you do that and it's the right idea
you know how do you build the immune
system up by by giving it nutrition but
the problem is that when you put that
intervention in you change all the loops
and you down regulate things and up
regular things how do we get to an
understanding of those interventions and
one of the problems with those is very
hard if you have hundreds of millions of
dollars to be made for drugs you have an
incentive but what's the incentive to do
those simple manipulations do the
large-scale trials that are necessary to
get us you know simple things we can use
globally on the prevention side yeah
question you know it's not an easy
answer obviously or we would have
already figured it out but as we begin
to look at things like single-cell
genomics we can tease out the
relationship between a perturbation here
and the downstream or upstream effects
of that it's going to take a lot of time
but as I said at the beginning we have
the tools now to begin to probe these
and I think as you were saying earlier
the discipline and the science that
needs to go into being really clear
about the the endpoints that we're
looking for
its systems biology and so whether
you're talking about it inexpensive
intervention or a complex intervention
we still have to go through the same
processes well so the the the simple
interventions
I wouldn't say simple so interventions
that are not pharmaceutical in their
fundamental nature such as diet exercise
exercise diet a reduction of obesity etc
these fall very much within the category
of National Institutes so the NIH for
instance is now funding large
epidemiological studies and large
dietary studies we actually were part of
them and these are really important
epidemiological studies so you begin by
first of all being disciplined not
moving goal posts and number two relying
on federal institutions such as the NIH
such as European institutions the fund
studies where the incentives are not
pharmaceutical and you have to empower
them to be able to do that you have to
empower them with money if to empower
the scientists who do them the
epidemiologists and you have to give
them the arm them with the right
language to do that and then
simultaneously you allow the
pharmaceutical universe starting with
academic laboratories who work on this
including my own to move along
drugs that will treat prevent in and and
potentially cure I know it's interesting
Seth who represents Gavi the vaccine
Alliance you know it reminded me you
know we do have some preventive cue
preventive approaches to cancer one is
the HPV vaccine another one is that is
the cervical cancer vaccine which is has
not been as widely
dorste as it should be and there are
others that you know just from a
vaccination standpoint we could be
reducing a tremendous amount julie do
you and and we are and in fact one of
the dimensions of this is rarely
discussed really is the success and in
drastically reducing the
of hepatitis B related liver cancer
liver cancers yes many years ago were
transferred our entire intellectual
property for hepatitis B vaccine to
China and you can watch the incidence of
liver cancer in China go down over the
past several decades so you know that's
a cancer prevention vaccine and we're
seeing the same thing with HPV vaccine
there early data from Australia now just
showing that not only are you preventing
gentle rewards but you're preventing
their early stages of HPV related
cancers and it was showing it's also
another dimension of that immunotherapy
these are cancers where the infectious
disease etiology is known I have a
theory that there are other cancers that
are probably infectious that we haven't
discovered that yet so hopefully we'll
have more vaccines down the road but you
know it again it's it's a technology
that is is improving and we will be able
to take some cancers off the table
that's exciting we have another question
right in front of Seth oh there's this
lady right here yes do you identify
yourself - I'm Caroline from Belgium on
the level of prevention I have a
question how much more do we know about
cancer being in our genes being genetic
like we know a few genetic
cancers breast and
we know a few known genes about that is
there more is fundamentally a genetic
disease there's nothing there's no way
around that idea
fundamentally cancer is caused by
mutations that disrupt mainly growth
sometimes death and you know things that
feed into growth and death including
metabolism and and and the way cells
differentiate and live and survive so
there's no getting around the fact that
fundamentally speaking cancer is a
genetic disease and will always be a
genetic disease now the question is
there about four or five ways that DNA
damage can occur there by unleashing
mutations number one is that you can
inherit them you can inherit the damaged
gene from your parents so a classic
example of that would be Braca one and
rapper two so you can inherit that we
now know that the inheritance can be
quite complex and we're making dramatic
advances in teasing apart the complexity
of that inheritance by this might mean
the following if you take all the
patients who have inherited breast
cancer as a circle and ask the question
how many of them can be explained by
single gene mutations that they
inherited from their parents it turns
out only thirty percent seventy percent
of the patients who have inherited
breast cancer breast cancer running in
their family mom had it grandma had it
etc etc 70 percent we could not explain
before because their risk was carried
not by one gene but by hundreds and
possibly thousands possibly tens of
thousands of genes interacting with each
other we are now using computational
algorithms being able to predict that
risk those women will hopefully be
screened using various techniques
mammography being only one of them and
hopefully we'll be able to prevent
cancer in those so that's one is that
you inherited from your parents number
two you can get it because viruses go
and tamper with your DNA there are many
examples of this cancer-causing viruses
that might occur because viruses
directly tamper with your dating or they
create inflammatory may lose that cause
cells to divide and therefore make
changes in their DNA number three is
that Kim caused by carcinogens
so chemicals including radiation which
go and damage DNA in its
chemical form and thereby contribute to
the alteration of DNA and number four
and that's the worst one accident
so when cells divide like all copying
machines they can make mistakes and when
they make mistakes you can get mutations
so really speaking there are four and
you can say maybe a fifth information
four or five mechanisms by which cancer
occurs and different cancers use
different intersections of these four or
five mechanisms to occur but
fundamentally speaking cancer which is
and always will be a genetic disease so
it's interesting because you know if
you're talking about all the accidents
that have to accumulate to create a
truly malignant phenotype you know one
that's capable of proliferating and
metastasizing it's a billion in one shot
but you know in a body where the
trillion cells a billion in one shot
doesn't seem so small after all right
we've got a question over there yeah you
identify yourself please yes I'm Mikoto
suoh Matsu from Tokyo the president of
the Japan Agency for medical research
and development and my question is I'm
always dreaming over global data sharing
and particularly in Japan
that we are analyzing the the genetics
of the super centenarians and the semi
super centenarians and the youngest
centenarians they are all over 100 years
old and there's a are expert to escape
from any kind of stress and carcinogen
perhaps and but if we can shake hands
each other and correct these genetics
data and compared with those who
suffered from cancer so can you can you
imagine if we can get some nice idea
which never happened before and making a
new approach that is my question it's a
great question and we you know we've got
a researcher and the academic side and
one on the drug side you know how do we
how do we improve our sharing capable
well that's a tough question I am part
of the National Academy of Medicine in
the United States it's which is
undertaking an effort to try to improve
the processes for data harmonization and
sharing and on the most advanced level
that's a brilliant idea and we
definitely need to do it but when you
start getting down into the complexities
of the governance and the
interoperability and the ownership and
the privacy issues it very quickly
becomes complex and I think the
opportunity in that space is for meadow
where middleware where we need private
public partnerships in some cases
research institutes such as the one
you're just got prescribing or academic
consortium where there are a number of
data sharing agreements going on now
across networks of academicians and
pediatrics in particular comes to mind
where we're working out agreements we're
being able to do that but I think the
dream of uniform data sharing is a long
way off at this point in time we have to
see that the success of of data banking
for cancer genomics has been
extraordinary the UK biobank for
something that I mean I'm embarrassed to
say that because of a variety of reasons
the United States actually fell behind
in appropriate bio banking so the UK
biobank is a very simple idea
it takes the genomes anonymize genomes
of individuals and attaches to them a
whole bunch of biometric data including
how long they live whether they get
breast cancer what whether they get
Alzheimer's disease and already we're
finding from that UK biobank
extraordinarily important information
this goes back to your question remember
I said that 70% of those people who have
breast who have familial breast cancer
whom we couldn't before detect based on
genetics because the genetics was
complicated in fact from the UK biobank
data now we can find women who have a 9
to 10 fold increase in breast cancer
risk based on tens of thousands I think
I would say thousands of gene variations
that in
the risk I'll make one more point about
this which is that it's which is that in
the UK they it required a change of
culture it required a change of culture
where where people said that yes there
is a privacy risk there is a possible
risk but we will anonymize it very
deeply and we will only allow people who
have signed lots of agreements etc are
appropriately trained to have access to
the bio bank information so it just
doesn't become a kind of free-for-all
in this in the centre centenarian
database what's emerging is very
interesting if among the centenarians
among the ex the super centenarians in
fact the super cent others it's a small
group people who look two hundred and
twenty hundred and eighteen hundred and
sixteen whatever they don't seem to die
of cancer they die of degenerative
diseases their bones break they die of
osteoarthritis and it's complications
they die of neurological diseases that
are degenerative so there's a lot of
information in all of these bio banks
and even though we might not be able to
share it globally I think the the UK
biobank has shown us very clearly that
if you do put information into a bio
bank and guard it safely and anonymize
it you can get a lot of important
information in terms of exposure
genetics and risk yeah that's a great
great question and UK biobank is great
we've got a question right here let us
know who you are see Sam died I come
from India I have had familial breast
cancer I've been through breast cancer
three times in my life I've lost my
sister to breast cancer my question here
is every time that I have gotten breast
cancer it's a new primary it's never
been a metastatic disease that one
phenomena I really can't understand that
how can someone get three new primaries
precisely because of the genetic risk of
cancer which is being carried
so I'm sorry in your case as a
hereditary risk so I mean again there is
a there is a I'm ignoring the soil
component to this because we don't
understand it so there's there must be
some soil component to this as well but
as far as the seed component to this is
the the actual development of the breast
cancers
certain that is because there is clearly
a hereditary risk and that hereditary
risk exists in every cell in your body
every breast cell in your body every
breast epithelial cells in your body
carries that hereditary risk and it's a
stochastic phenomena statistical process
in which one of them is acquiring enough
mutations to become a cancer cell I'm
ignoring the soil aspect of this sure so
the first two times my er PR was
negative yes and the third time was
worse strongly positive yes not on so I
was well this little bit but this is the
kind of information that we're getting
from complex genomic banks so I don't
know if you know India I don't talk
about individual incidents but what I do
want to say is that in the past a person
like you if they were brca1 and brca2
negative and negative for peer that'd be
you know these other genes four five six
seven genes we would not be able to know
whether you actually carry risk or
didn't carry risk we wouldn't know
whether to screen you or not strain you
et cetera now we do know we are
beginning to know we can identify with
if if the genomes of this audience was
sequenced for breast cancer alone for
familial breast cancer alone there would
be one or two people who I we would be
able to identify and say that you have a
nine to ten fold higher risk than the
general population of having breast
cancer this is a small study we have to
generalize it across populations in
European study
it's a white study it's a white female
study there are many ifs ands or buts
but there is definite progress on
identifying women with breast cancer
with higher risk thank you my question
is that if I ever were to get cancer
again what immunotherapy help me I mean
you don't know my entire history my peer
diamond is a very random question sure
we can't we can't unfortunately dispense
medical device advice from the a
legislature what we've learned in this
last hour
obviously that cancer is extremely
personal that it affects people forget
the statistics as we've learned from
Mickey and his dad and from you it
couldn't be more personal we've also
learned how extraordinary complex it is
and if you had to find three people to
to help solve that complexity you
couldn't do better with hiroshima
cuchini Julie Louise ribbiting and Sid
Matt mukherjee thank mukherjee thank you
very much
[Applause]